The city eternal truth is at the end of a path which 
consists in a dialogue between Carnap* and Grice*, 
represented imperfectly in this world by RBJ and JLS.

JLS posted to The Grice Club some material under the heading "Salva Veritate" responding to a previous message of mine entitled "Forms of judgement, propositional attitudes".
I foolishly commented at length by typing into the comment box, and 
blogger taught me better by dumping the whole thing.
So I decided that rather than spend ages just reproducing 
what blogger discarded I would do something a little bit 
more carefully articulated for "The City of Eternal Truth".

I begin therefore with a bit of discursion before connecting 
this up to what JLS/Gtice wrote.

There are a few distinct concepts which involve the word 
"truth", which naturally all have something to do with 
semantics.

definition of truth
truth function
truth conditions

I'm going to say something about how these connect with 
certain other concepts:

semantics
meaning
proposition
tautology
analyticity
logical truth

By a "definition of truth" is usually meant, the definition of 
a predicate "true" which tells us which of the sentences in 
some language is true.

This is the centrepiece of one of the most famous papers on 
semantics by Carnap, and because of that paper a definition 
of truth is usually considered to be paradigmatic of teh 
definition of "semantics" for a language.
This is unfortunate for several reasons.

The most important one is that knowing which sentences of a 
language are true does not usually get us very close at all 
to knowing what the sentences mean.
There is a special case in which it does, which is when the 
sentences are understood as an implicit definition in some 
general logical framework (say a first order language) of 
some abstract mathematical theory.  In such a context the 
set of true sentences determines a set of models, and if we 
take these sentences as an implicit definition of the 
concepts involved we have a well-defined semantics.

However, as soon as you start talking about languages for 
talking about the real world this doesn't work.
Knowing which sentences are true in some language supposedly 
about the word doesn't tell us anything about what they 
mean, and knowing that a sentence is true is not useful if 
we don't know what it means.


"First and foremost ... is the demand for
a theoretically adequate specification of
conditions which will authorise the assignment
of truth conditions to suitably
selected expressions"

Grice seems to have got his tongue twisted here.
Surely he has too many "conditions" here, and is really just talking about truth conditions:

First and foremost ... is the demand for
a specification of conditions under which sentences are true,
viz. truth conditions.

Is that what he meant?

JL says:
--- something very much like the expression of this or that
proposition, in R. B. Jones's parlance.

In my scheme, truth conditions being a part of the semantics/meaning is the condition for it to be possible reason deductively in some language.  (its what you need to express the condition that an inference is sound, and a deductive inference is in my book just a logically sound one, using logic here in the broad sense).

Grice continues (JLS tells us):

"Meanings are NOT natural growths, and need
to be conferred or instituted."

How surprised I am at this.
This is more formalistic than Carnap, who wants to define formal languages because he doesn't think one can pin down the semantics of natural languages.

I gather that Grice didn't like the "natural"/"artificial" nomenclature, and I have my own doubts.
The important distinction is surely between those which have been brought into existence by being defined, and those which evolved in use and therefore can only be understood by reference to that usage, which one describes rather than defines (though one might do that by offering a definition).

JLS

--- This would exclude indeed the cat from miaowing
thereby 'meaning-that-he-is-hungry', as Jones aptly notes.

RBJ

My own grounds for taking this position were different.
I take the miaow to be expressive rather than descriptive, and you have to know the cat to have a sense of what it might express.  So there is no objective propositional content.

Grice continues:

"But the mere fact that they are needed
is [not enough] to show that they are
available."

At this point Grice seems to go onto the 'epistemic retreat' 
that Jones
was speaking about. This is not to take originally from 
Jones's
approach and account, just to note that -- hey, Grice is 
using
the 'sceptic', too. For Grice writes:

"We might be left in the sceptic's
position of seeing clearly what is
needed, and yet being at the same
time totally unable to attain it."

----

Since Jones's 'work-in-progress' features the word 
'rationality' in the
title, here is Grice's next sentence then:

"We should not, of course CONFUSE [emphasis Grice's]
the suggestion that there is, strictly
speaking, no such thing as the exercise
of rationality with the suggestion that there
is no rationally acceptable theoretical
account of what the exercise of rationality
consists in."

RBJ

Is Grice here assuming or implicating that there is "no such thing as the exercise of rationality"?

My own position is that there is such a thing as the exercise of rationality AND that it would be nice if there were a great deal more of it, AND that conceivably there might be BUT that there is no (true and complete) theoretical account of what rationality is (rationally acceptable or not).

--

At this point he re-focus the attention again on 'the 
alethic': the
true:

Why conditions are 'truth-' or alethic conditions:

"What is being sought, and, one hopes,
legitimately fixed by FIAT would be a
SOLID guarantee that, in certain
conditions, in calling something
a so-and-so, one would NOT be
mis-calling it a so and so. The conditions
in question would of course have to
be conditions of truth."

--- (WoW, p. 364).

The actual passage that I THOUGHT, and still think, 
constitutes the
gist of what I was thinking as a reply to Jones is actually 
later on in
the Retrospective Epilogue. A very CENTRAL concern, in the 
middle of
rather frivolous "reactions", by Grice, to the 'disputes' 
between
Russell and Strawson.

Grice writes, on p. 374, then, and this is back to "salva 
veritate":

---

"What exerts [the most] influence upon me is
my inclination to regard


PROPOSITIONS"

-- [so I'm glad Jones opted for this. JLS]

"as constructed entities"

--- hence 'complexes'

---

"whose ESSENTIAL character

lies in their

TRUTH-VALUE."

-----

"Entities which have an

INDISPENSABLE role

to play in a

RATIONAL and scientific presentation

of the domain of logical inference"

--- what Jones now focus as 'nomologico-deductive' for the 
cogent
reasons explained by Jones to the Grice club in "Forms of 
judgement,
propositional attitudes".

Grice continues:

"From this point of view

A TRUTH-FUNCTIONAL"

-- and not just truth-conditional

"concept of complex propositions

offers, perhaps, for the rational

construction of at least part of

the realm of PROPOSITIONS."

The latter tag I've discussed with Jones elsehwere -- it 
relates to
Carnap's choice, on request, of an intensional framework. In 
Grice's
parlance:

"[And this] even thoughthe fact

that many complex propositions

seem PLAINLY to be non-truth-functional

ensures that many problems remain".

--- Recall that for Grice, problem-free philosophy is dead-
philosophy,
so don't take that sceptically. It is 'motivational', 
rather.

---

Now, Jones did mention the connectives -- and then there's 
also "not"
which does not really connect --. But Jones also mentions 
"all", which
some don't regard as truth-functional. In fact, most don't. 
But the
problem is not unsolubable, and indeed 'all' correlates with 
'and',
and 'some' with 'or'.

---

It's slightly odd that Grice sees 'intensionalism' or 
something
(perhaps he is thinking of counterfactual conditionals -- 
vide
his "Indicative Conditionals" in WOW -- as appearing with 
COMPLEX
propositions. But I would think that it may appear with 
simpler
propositions in a number of guises:

"Socrates is essentially rational", for example. It does not 
look like
a complex proposition. I.e. it does not seem to involve a 
quantifier,
or a connective, or negation. It just means

NecFa.

where 'a' is an individual, F is a feature ('rational') and 
Nec Jones
would read as 'analytic'.

---

Another example may be:

"You can't do that!"

--- read as "It is not permitted to you to do that", which 
again does
not seem to be 'truth-conditional' in that it seems to 
involve
some 'denotic' operator in the form of an obligation or a 
permission or
a prohibition, etc. Hardly matters like "if it's raining I 
don't
picnic", or "Either I picnic or I don't". (Or better, 
"either it rains
or it doesn't" -- exporting intentions out of the picture). 
Etc.

In any case, 'salva veritate' some other day, I hope!

===========================================================
Thanks Speranza for a well considered response, and for bringing out the big issues at stake here.

I see that you are properly unwilling to join me in ad hominem tirades.  However, I don't know what its going to take for me to "get over it".

On the comparison with Grice and Strawson I'm not sufficienlly knowledgeable to say much, but I note two points.
First, in my message I distinguished "betrayal" from "cogent critiqe", implicating that a mere critique, however severe, would not by itself have counted as a betrayal (for Carnap I suggest, even if from a close friend or associate).

Let me clarify this with some more temperate language.  I draw the distinction between a critique and a repudiation.
"Two Dogmas" is not a coherent critique, but it is a forceful repudiation.  As to the relationship between Grice and Strawson, I would suggest that critique rather than repudiation is at stake.
(there is a middle ground in which one goes separate ways, and at worst it is that).

Finally, I add, against myself, that in my reading of Carnap and Quine and of the correspondence between them, there is not one scintilla of evidence of bad blood between them.
If either of them felt betrayed or guilty of betraying, the betrayed no sign of it in their writings.

And past the finale, I ask, if Quine is "merely" American philosophy, does anything else survive in the second half of the century, or does he dominate analytic philosophy as a whole?
Surely, like the castigated ordinary language philsophers they will protest that they are not a school but have their own minds?
(where is Kripke, surely not quite Quinean)

RBJ



This is a paper I am acquainted with, but I had not previously noticed the contrast between what he says here, and what he did only two years previously in "The Philosophical Basis of Intuitionistic Logic".

But before I say something about that I should say something about how I take Dummett in the general area you are discussing.
It seems to me that part of what he is doing here is to offer a critique, in much less sympathetic terms, of aspects of "ordinary language philosophy" for which Grice, as an insider, was providing a gentler critique.
Grice's theories explain why some of the conclusions which Dummett criticises were unsound and advance "ordinary language philosophy" onto a new plane.
Dummett's critique should be regarded as of ordinary language philosophy before Grice.  This is surely the kind of fallacy which Grices theories of implicature were intended to draw out and correct.  When he talks about the failure to distinguish between semantics and pragmatics, this again fails in Grice's case.  We may debate whether implicature really qualifies as pragmatics, but the distinction which it brings and which Grice explores in strand 5 of his retrospective epilogue, serves a similar purpose, the recognition of some "central" aspect of significance which has something to do with truth conditions, from more peripheral significance which includes implicatures.

Going back to the contrast between Dummett here and the man two years earlier, we find that Dummett's case for intuitionistic logic (insofar as I understand it, since I never could manage to get through the whole paper, not from incomprehension but from despair) was based precisely on denying any notion of semantics apart from usage which might serve to validate classical deduction.

I once briefly managed to get on a mailing list connected with meetings at Oxford on the Philosophy of Mathematics organised I think by Isaacson.
The last of these which I attended, before apparently being deleted from the list, was a meeting at which Dummett was present (though I did not know, and hence did not recognise him), and in which Frege was the topic.

Though I had no conversation with Dummett I did after the meeting have a discussion with some young men who I took to be his students, and took them to task in relationship to Dummett's defence of intuitionistic logic.  Surely I said to them, the elementary proofs of the soundness of classical logic relative to the accepted (and very straightforward) semantics obviated any need to fall back on intuitionistic logic. (or something along these lines)
They were evidently completely unaware even that classical logic had a well defined semantics let alone that its soundness was provable.

Anyway, this was in the late 80s, long after Dummet had apparently decided that to take usage as an exclusive guide to meaning was unsound, and that semantics 

====================================================================

[JLSblogs] [The Grice Club] Morris, Carnap, and Grice on 'pragmatic'
 From: "J. L. Speranza" <jlsperanza@aol.com>
 To: jlsblogs@rbjones.com
 
It's interesting that S C Levinson, the author of _Presumptive
Meanings: Generalised Conversational Implicature_ quotes Morris in his
previous book, _Pragmatics_, Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics.

Levinson quotes 4 books by MORRIS.

1. FOUNDATIONS of the Theory of Signs
In Morris et al, Int. Encyc. etc.
Repr in Morris WRITINGS

2. SIGNS, LANGUAGE, & BEHAVIOUR
Prentice Hall.

3. SIGNIFICATION & SIGNIFICANCE
MIT

4. WRITINGS ON THE GENERAL THEORY
OF SIGNS. Mouton.

and discussed the author on pp.1-5 and 10

"The modern usage of "pragmatics" is attributable to MORRIS, who was
concerned to outline (after LOCKE) the general shame of SEMIOTIC".
Morris
defined pragmatics as "the study of the Relation of Signs to
Intepreters"
(MORRIS, Foundations, p.6). Morris writes: "It is a sufficiently
accurate
characterisation of pragmatics to say that it deals with the BIOTIC
aspect
of SEMIOSIS, that is, with all the PSYCHOLOGICAL, BIOLOGICAL, and
SOCIOLOGICAL phenomena which occur in the functioning of signs" (Morris,
Foundations, p.108).

Levinson then goes on to discuss Carnap (In Presumptive Meanings,
Levinson shows he is aware of the seminal Carnap's and Bar-Hillel's
idea of semantic information and other notions of Carnapian origin such
as intensional isomorphism. And then why wouldn't he?)

Levinson writes:

"After an initial Morrisian usage (Carnap,
Foundations of Logic & Mathematics, in Morris et al, p.2), Carnap
adopted a
different version of the Morrisian trichotomy. Unfortunately, Carnap's
use
of "pragmatics" was confused by his adoption of Morris's further
distinction between pure and descriptive pragmatics, and he came to
equate pragmatics with descriptive semiotics in general. But Carnap was
not
even consistent here: he also held that there was room for a pure
pragmatic=
s!"

Levinson notes:

"In Morris's usage, there can be found a systematic
three-way ambiguity about "pragmatics":
First, The word was applied not only to BRANCHES of inquiry but also to
features of the object language.

Second, the term was used to refer to deictic expressions only, since
the
reference to users was essential in this case.
Third, it was thought that only pragmatics studied context!

Levinson summarises:

"A number of distinct usages of the term "pragmatics"
have sprong from Morris's original division of semiotics: the study of
the
huge range of psychological and sociological phenomena involved in sign
systems in general or in language in particular, or the study of certain
abstract concepts that make reference to agents (one of Carnap's
usages),
or the study of deixis, or finally, the recent use among Griceans, the
study of non-truth conditional aspects of meaning (i.e. MEANING MINUS
Truth-Conditions).

FROM MORRIS TO GRICE, via CARNAP. Grice never used 'pragmatics' with a
final 's', though -- JUST 'pragmatic' (pragmatic vs. logical inference,
in WoW:RE -- he was a dissident and loved to see his work
as 'semantics' (title of Section II of WoW: Only when mixed
with 'metaphysics' ("Metaphysics and Semantics", "Semantics and
Metaphysics").

Bach considers the following chronology of pragmatics, which was
brought to
my attention by Larry Tapper. In
http://online.sfsu.edu/~kbach/semprag.html
K Bach quotes:A Chronology of Formulations, from Morris to the Standard
Griceans...:

"Semantics deals with the relation of signs to … objects which they may
or
do denote. Pragmatics concerns the relation of signs to their
interpreters."
Morris, p. 35.


"Syntax studies sentences, semantics studies propositions. Pragmatics
is the
study of linguistic acts and the contexts in which they are performed.
There are two major types of problems to be solved within pragmatics:
first, to define interesting types of speech acts and speech products;
second, to characterize the features of the speech context which help
determine which proposition is expressed by a given sentence. … It is a
semantic problem to specify the rules for matching up sentences of a
natural language with the propositions that they express. In most cases,
however, the rules will not match sentences directly with propositions,
but
will match sentences with propositions relative to features of the
context
in which the sentence is used. These contextual features are part of the
subject matter of pragmatics."
Stalnaker, p. 383. I met him at Yale. He is my favourite MIT Griceian.

"I draw the theoretical line between semantic interpretation and
pragmatic
interpretation by taking the semantic component to properly represent
only
those aspects of the meaning of the sentence that an ideal
speaker-hearer
of the language would know in an anonymous letter situation, … [where
the=
re is] no clue whatever about the motive, circumstances of
transmission, or
any other factor relevant to understanding the sentence on the basis of
its
context of utterance.
Katz, p. 14.- Katz draws intensely from Griceaianism.


"PRAGMATICS = MEANING - TRUTH CONDITIONS (p. 2)
What we need in addition is some function that tells us about the
meaning
of utterances. … The domain of this pragmatic function is the set of
utterances, which are pairs of sentences and contexts, so that for each
utterance, our function will return as a value a new context-the
context as
changed by the sentence uttered … . And we can treat the meaning of the
utterance as the difference between the original context and the context
arrived at by utterance the sentence. [This applies to only] a
restricted
subset of pragmatic aspects of meaning."
Gazdar, p. 4. -- sometime PhD student under Palmer at Reading.

"Semantics provides a complete account of sentence meaning for the
language,
[by] recursively specifying the truth conditions of the sentences of the
language. … Pragmatics provides an account of how sentences are used in
utterances to convey information in context."
Ruth M. Kempson, p. 139 -- an uniguist living in London ("School of
Parsimony").


"Pragmatics is the study of language which focuses attention on the
users
and the context of language use rather than on reference, truth, or
grammar."
Fotion, the Oxford Companion to Philosophy, p. 709


"Pragmatics studies the use of language in context, and the
context-dependence of various aspects of linguistic interpretation. …
[Its
branches include the theory of how] one and the same sentence can
express
different meanings or propositions from context to context, owing to
ambiguity or indexicality or both, … speech act theory, and the theory
of
conversational implicature."
Lycan, the Cambridge Dict. of Philosophy, p. 588.


"The distinction between semantics and pragmatics is, roughly, the
distinction between the significance conventionally or literally
attached
to words, and thence to whole sentences, and the further significance
that
can be worked out, by more general principles, using contextual
information.
Davies, the Blackwell Companion to Philosophy, p.124.

ENTER GRICE -- or rather its rationale. Now, how did Grice get this via
Morris (if at all) is probably via STEVENSON, ETHICS & LANGUAGE which
is probably related to Morris.

Thus Grice writes in STUDIES IN THE WAY OF WORDS:

"I include under the
head of "mean" any usages of "mean" foudn in sentences of the pattern".

1. U means something by x.

"This is overrigid but it will serve as an indication" (p.215). STUDIES
does not index "pragmatics", but there's this interesting use on
p.375: "I
canvassed the idea taht the alleged divergence betwween modernists'
logic
and vulgar logical connectives might be represented as being a matter
not
of LOGICAL but of pragmatic import"... He had previously written, that
when
Strawson wrote _Logic_, Grice was "devoting much attention to what
might be
loosely called the distinction between LOGICAL AND PRAGMATIC
INFERENCES...
to elucidate problems in the philosophy of perception ("seem" vs "is")
etc.
Lots of problems seemd to me to rest on A BLURRING OF THE
LOGICAL-PRAGMATIC
DISTINCTION.

Grice cites Stevenson in the previous quote about Mr Wilson... But in
general, it is wiser to see with LR Horn, that if an Oxford can use
"semantics" instead of "pragmatics", he will...
(Horn, Why Gricean Inference is Gricean, in _The Legacy of Grice_, in K
Hall, et al).

But Grice just stuck with 'logical' vs. pragmatic inference (WoW:RE)
which is vague in that his point is that to make sense of an inference
as 'pragmatic' we have to extend, slightly, the point of 'logical'. Etc.

References
Davies, M.
The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 90-139.
Fotion, N.
Pragmatics. In T. Honderich (ed.): The Oxford Companion to Philosophy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 709.
Gazdar, G.
Pragmatics: Implicature, Presupposition, and Logical Form. London:
Academic
Press.
Grice, HP.
Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Katz, J.
Propositional Structure and Illocutionary Force. New York: Crowell.
Kempson, R.
Grammar and conversational principles. In Newmeyer, F. (ed.):
Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey, Vol. II. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 139-163.
Lycan, W.
Philosophy of language. In R. Audi (ed.): The Cambridge Dictionary of
Philosophy. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, pp. 586-589.
Morris, C.W Foundations of the theory of signs. In Writings on the
Theory
of Signs. The Hague: Mouton, pp. 17-74.
Stalnaker, R.
Pragmatics. In G. Harman and D. Davidson (eds.): Semantics of Natural
Language. Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 380-397.
